.Dd March 31, 2022
.Dt check-springshell 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm check-springshell
.Nd try to determine if a host is vulnerable to the SpringShell vulnerabilities
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl Vhv
.Op Fl j Ar jar
.Op Fl p Ar path
.Op Fl s Ar skip
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
tool attempts to determine whether the host it is
executed on is vulnerable to the vulnerabilities
grouped together under the "SpringShell" name.
.Pp
This includes CVE-2022-22963, a Spring SpEL /
Expression Resource Access Vulnerability, as well as
CVE-2022-22965, the spring-webmvc/spring-webflux RCE
termed "SpringShell".
.Pp
.Nm
will look for nested Java archive files and so
may be somewhat intrusive to run and should be
executed with care and consideration of the system's
load.
Please see DETAILS for more information.
.Sh OPTIONS
The following options are supported by
.Nm :
.Bl -tag -width p_path_
.It Fl V
Print version number and exit.
.It Fl h
Print a short help message and exit.
.It Fl j Ar jar
Check only this archive, nothing else.
Can be specified multiple times for multiple JAR
(or other zip formatted archive) files.
.It Fl p Ar path
Limit filesystem traversal to this directory.
Can be specified multiple times.
If not specified,
.Nm
will default to '/'.
.It Fl s Ar skip
Skip the given checks.
Valid arguments are 'files', 'packages', and
\'processes'.
.It Fl v
Be verbose.
Can be specified multiple times.
.El
.Sh DETAILS
CVE-2022-22963 describes a possible remote code
execution (RCE) vulnerability in the popular Spring
Boot framework.
Simply sending a POST request with a specific payload
can cause the vulnerable server to execute commands on
the attacker's behalf.
.Pp
Likewise, CVE-2022-22965 describes another possible
RCE vulnerability, termed "SpringShell", which follows
a common webshell upload pattern.
.Pp
To determine whether a host is vulnerable, the
.Nm
tool will look for classes and java archives relating
to the known vulnerable versions of the Spring
framework.
.Pp
The discovery process may include running
.Xr find 1 ,
.Xr lsof 1 ,
.Xr rpm 1 ,
or
.Xr yinst 1 ;
please use the
.Fl s
flag to skip any checks that might have a negative
impact on your host.
.Pp
The output of the command attempts to be human
readable and provide sufficient information to judge
whether the host requires attention.
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
The following environment variables influence the
behavior of
.Nm :
.Bl -tag
.It CHECK_SPRINGSHELL_FIND_OPTS_PRE
Additional options to pass to
.Xr find 1
prior to the path name(s).
.Pp
By default,
.Nm
runs "find / -type f -name '*.[ejw]ar'";
the contents of this variable are placed immediately
after the 'find' and before the path name(s).
.It CHECK_SPRINGSHELL_FIND_OPTS_POST
Additional options to pass to
.Xr find 1
immediately after the path name(s).
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Sample invocation on a non-vulnerable host:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ check-springshell
No obvious indicators of vulnerability found.
$
.Ed
.Pp
Sample invocation only looking at processes
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ check-springshell -s files -s packages -v -v
=> Running all checks...
==> Skipping package check.
==> Looking for jars...
==> Skipping files check.
==> Checking all found jars...
check-springshell 1.0 localhost: Possibly vulnerable jar 'BOOT-INF/lib/spring-beans-5.3.16.jar' (inside of /usr/local/myapp/myservice-0.0.1.jar) used by process 15569.

$
.Ed
.Pp
Sample invocation searching only /var and /usr/local/lib
and skipping package and process checks:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ check-springshell -p /var -p /usr/local/lib -s packages -s processes
The following archives of likely vulnerable versions were found:
/var/./spring-beans-3.0.5.jar
/usr/local/lib/./log4shell-vulnerable-app-0.0.1-SNAPSHOT.jar:BOOT-INF/lib/spring-webmvc-5.3.13.jar
$
.Ed
.Pp
Note version comparisons are only done for packages,
which is why the above output incudes files ending in
a seemingly non-vulnerable version.
.Pp
To avoid mountpoint traversal on a Unix system where
.Xr find 1
requires the
.Fl x
flag to precede the paths:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ env CHECK_SPRINGSHELL_FIND_OPTS_PRE="-x" check-springshell
No obvious indicators of vulnerability found.
.Ed
.Pp
To only search files newer than '/tmp/foo':
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ env CHECK_SPRINGSHELL_FIND_OPTS_POST="-newer /tmp/foo" check-springshell
No obvious indicators of vulnerability found.
.Ed
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Nm
will return 0 if the host was found not to be
vulnerable and not in need of any update;
it will return 1 if a vulnerable jar or package was
detected.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr find 1 ,
.Xr lsof 1 ,
.Xr rpm 1 ,
.Xr yinst 1
.Sh HISTORY
.Nm
was originally written by
.An Jan Schaumann
.Aq jschauma@netmeister.org
in March 2022.
.Sh BUGS
Please file bugs and feature requests via GitHub pull
requests and issues or by emailing the author.
